**Reducing Commercial Aviation Fatalities**

**Introduction**<br />
We know that the job of a pilot comes under those roles which require the highest level of consciousness, but there may be a situation where a pilot may also get distracted due to various reasons. Past records show that there are lots of flight-related fatalities that occurred due to loss of “airplane state awareness”. So there should be a mechanism by which we can identify and prevent flight-related fatalities. The consulting firm Booz Allen Hamilton, posted a challenge for Data Scientists on Kaggle around 2 years back, on the lookout for a machine learning model that can detect troubling events from aircrew’s physiological data.


**Dataset features** <br />
**crew**: This is a unique id for a pair of pilots.<br />
**time**: The time duration of the experiment. Unit in seconds.<br />
**seat**: 0 for the pilot sitting left and 1 for the pilot on the right.<br />
‘eeg_fp1’, ‘eeg_f7’, ‘eeg_f8’, ‘eeg_t4’, ‘eeg_t6’, ‘eeg_t5’, ‘eeg_t3’, ‘eeg_fp2’, ‘eeg_o1’, ‘eeg_p3’, ‘eeg_pz’, ‘eeg_f3’, ‘eeg_fz’, ‘eeg_f4’, ‘eeg_c4’, ‘eeg_p4’, ‘eeg_poz’, ‘eeg_c3’, ‘eeg_cz’, ‘eeg_o2’ : These are the EEG ratings, abbreviations in name of these features are Fp = “Fronto-polar” , F = “Frontal” , C = “Central” , P= “Parietal”, O = “Occipital” and T = “Temporal”. The number in the feature name denotes the distance of the recording point on the scalp from the middle line. Odd numbers are for the left side of the scalp and Even numbers denote the right side of the scalp.<br />
**ecg**: Electrocardiogram which is used to measure electrical signals generated by the heart. It can be used to understand someone’s physiological state.<br />
**r**: Respiration measures from the rise and fall of the chest.<br />
**gsr**: Galvanic skin response is a measure of the intensity of our emotional state.<br />
**event**: State of the pilot at the given time. This is our target variable.<br />

**ML Formulation**<br />
**Problem Type:** The model needs to predict one of the following cognitive states A (Baseline), B (SS), C (CA), and D (DA) of the pilot over a time during an experiment.<br />
**Type of data:** Data set here is of a time series nature and consists of medical science parameters like ECG, EEG, Respiration, and GSR which are electrical signals recorded over time.<br />
**Challenges for the model:** Dataset consists of physiological data collected from different machines being operated on 18 different pilots and wires of these machines tend to pick up unnecessary signals, hence there is some noise in the data.<br />
**Business Constraints**: It should be able to predict the pilot’s cognitive state in real-time so that if a pilot is in a troubling state they could be alerted right away, preventing accidents and saving lives.<br />
**Performance metric to be used**: Multi-Class Log loss<br />
